---
source: "PDF"
extracted: "2026-03-12"
---
National Science Foundation, the National Endowment for the Humanities, and other agencies to support research on the next generation of digital libraries, has allowed Perseus to capitalize on a decade of developing a digital library on Greco-Roman antiquity and explore the problems raised by other domains within the humanities.

Gregory Crane, Robert F. Chavez, Anne Mahoney, Thomas L. Milbank, Jeffrey A. Rydberg-Cox, David A. Smith,and Clifford E. Wulfman Drudgery and Deep Thought

The Perseus Digital Library (www.perseus.

tufts.edu) has had to confront the problems faced by any general cross-disciplinary digital library for the humanities [11]. Support from the Digital Library Initiative, funded by the hope our work will help anyone designing a digitallibrary better understand the needs of humanists.We also hope the collections to which we con-tribute will help anyone producing content in thehumanities better understand how their workmight evolve to exploit the possibilities of thesenew, intensively interlinked environments.

Challenges for the HumanitiesAll academics writing scholarly texts, whetherhumanists or scientists, face similar challenges [7].The technology of publication through which textis given form and disseminated to an audienceimposes fundamental constraints on all discourse,especially on subjects that depend on nonverbalrepresentation. The changes resulting from theInternet only intensify a transformation that startedlong ago. While the printing press radicallyenhanced our ability to disseminate words, its

greatest effect was arguably on our ability to publishnonverbal objects accurately and economically, includ-ing lists of numerical data, diagrams, maps, and images[5]. Even before humanists began to use the Internetwidely, the ability to distribute hundreds of megabytesof data on cheap plastic disks was changing scholarlypractice in fundamental ways. The first Perseus CD-ROM (published in 1992after the project was named for the Greek hero whoexplored the limits of the known world) included farmore visual information about art objects than had everbeen economically feasible to publish in print; we wereable to include hundreds of images illustrating individ-ual objects, allowing art historians to see more detail,and thus pose more refined questions about them.Today, an individual project can construct and publishamazingly rich data sets. Yet, while digital libraries arelibraries insofar as they automatically aggregate thesedata sets, so the whole is more valuable than the sum ofits parts, these systems work only with the data sets putinto them. A fundamental challenge for scholars in alldisciplines is therefore how to structure their publica-tions so they may be integrated into larger units.Humanists face some challenges that scientists donot. Unlike many scientific publications, whose usefullife is frequently less than a decade or so, documents inthe humanities often remain useful for centuries.Humanists are therefore especially vulnerable to shift-ing standards and methods for preservation and publi-cation. Archaeological excavations, for example,destroy the original sites; excavators' field notebooks,pictures, drawings, and other documents provide theonly access that later researchers will ever have to thefull archaeological context. These documents must bepreserved indefinitely. Critical editions, dictionaries,museum catalogs, and similar document classes repre-sent the foundation for much humanistic research;they, too, must remain accessible for many years, possi-bly for centuries. The second challenge facing humanists, then, isrelated to the first. Not only must they structure newpublications for digital libraries, they must also findways to transform old documents--often quite com-plex in structure--so they, too, may be integrated intothe new repositories of human knowledge.Finally, humanists have a special relationship withhuman language. Machine translation and cross-language information retrieval are perhaps even moreimportant to humanists than to their colleagues in thesciences. The historical record extends only roughly4,000 years into the past; we are closer in time to JuliusCaesar than Julius Caesar was to the earliest extantcuneiform and hieroglyphic texts. Written sources formost of human history are thus stored in languages very

different from those now in wide use. Only limitedresearch in machine translation or cross-language infor-mation retrieval focuses on Akkadian, Arabic, classicalChinese, Egyptian hieroglyphics, classical Greek, Latin,Sanskrit, Sumerian, or other historically crucial lan-guages. Modern computational linguistics offers newtechniques that, when implemented for these older lan-guages, might revolutionize teaching and research alike;for the first time, if this were possible, humans would beable to work directly with the many languages needed tostudy, say, the cultural continuum extending fromGreece through the Middle East and beyond.But even if automated translation matched thefidelity of human translators and provided modern-language translations faithfully reflecting the content ofan original source document, translation is a limitedmedium. Literature, in particular, is notoriouslyintranslatable; serious students of the historical recordknow that culture and language are inextricably inter-twined. We thus need systems that let us work moreeffectively with documents in the original source lan-guages and digital libraries that automatically link asmany complementary tools as possible.The tools we've developed within Perseus for Greekand Latin allow us to see the benefits of digital gram-mars, lexica, and other similar linguistic tools designedto work together [8]. The challenge for the next gener-ation of scholars is to develop radically new linguisticreference tools drawing on machine translation, cross-language information retrieval, and similar techniques.

Case Studies for General ProblemsIn addition to our core work on Greek and Romanantiquity, the Perseus team is pursuing a number ofprojects and collaborations to explore and addressproblems confronting any digital library for thehumanities, including:

Archimedes. Collecting sources for the history ofmechanics from antiquity through the early modernperiod (with the Max Planck Institute for the His-tory of Science).Egypt. Publishing the Museum of Fine Arts/Harvardexcavations of ancient Egyptian sites near the Pyra-mids at Giza (with the Museum of Fine Arts).Publication. Developing standards for new scholarlypublications in digital libraries (with the Stoa Pub-lishing Consortium, www.stoa.org, which is basedin the classics department of the University of Ken-tucky, and works on new models for refereed schol-arly publishing and collaboration online).Shakespeare. Adapting the New Variorum ShakespeareSeries, the most elaborate series of critical editions inthe humanities, to the electronic environment (with

Space and TimeAlthough many literary works describe fictionalworlds and times, the majority of the resourcesused by humanities scholars refer to real time andreal geographic space. Because time and space areuniversally relevant, they can be used to classifyand visualize the content of even the most hetero-geneous collections; subject-specific concept hier-archies cannot always be generalized beyond their mostobvious applications. We have therefore developed gen-eral tools--timeline, mapping, and charting--for iden-tifying the places and dates our texts refer to. Developedfor visualizing the geographic and temporal referencesin the Perseus Greco-Roman and London collections,these tools have proved just as useful for the Library ofCongress American Memory documents on the Euro-pean settlement of California and on the recent historyof the Upper Midwest.Every English-language document in the PerseusDigital Library is scanned for references to dates andproper names. Although most dates are easily recogFigure 1. Temporal references in the Perseus Greco-Roman corpus, with concentrations in classicalGreece (fifth and fourth centuries B.C.) and the lateRoman Republic (first century B.C.). Each red dot represents a reference to a date, and each yellow bara reference to a date range. The dots and bars arelinks to the passages in the texts.

Figure 2. Geographic references in American Memory books on California (sites in the U.S.). Note the scattering of sites across the country from migration narratives.

nized, place names have to be distinguished from otherproper names and different places with the same namedisambiguated. Our tools recognize over 95% of alltoponyms in unrestricted text, but once recognized,over 67% of the toponyms in most documents are stillambiguous. For example, does "Memphis'' refer to acity in Egypt or a city in Tennessee? The answerdepends on the context; the mapping tool decidesamong possible toponym identifications by comparingthe distance of each candidate from the centroid of thesurrounding sites and their relative importance.Once dates and places are identified, they can beplotted. A graph like the one in Figure 1 shows the temFigure 3. King William Street, London. Historical maps, aligned with a modern geospatial database, permit users to see how the city plan has changed over the past 250 years.

Figure 4. XML documents in Perseus use any of several document type definitions, since the system is concerned primarily with their underlying structures. We extract proper names, citations of other texts, and dates from these documents into a database. When a reader requests a page of text, Perseus uses that database, along with the reader's preferences and the style sheets defined by the collection editor, to construct a rich, hyperlinked display.

poral scope of a single text or group of texts; Figure 2shows the places in the American Memory Californiacollection; and the maps in Figure 3 show the samestreet in London at a series of points in history.

Managing the TextsDigital libraries rely on a powerful, structured docu-ment format. Perseus documents are encoded in XMLusing several different document type definitions.Even those in the same DTD may represent the struc-ture of a document very differently; for example, onemay call a chapter <div1 type=chapter> andanother <chapter>. Our configurable XML man-agement system maps diverse tagging schemes ontoabstract structures (such as chapter, page, stanza, orspeech), providing an easily extensible citation schemefor documents from many different sources [10]. When a reader requests a page, the Perseus text sys-tem finds it within the document, extracts it as anXML fragment, and passes it on to modules thatextract citations, disambiguate proper names, andmap inflected foreign-language terms onto dictionaryentries. At the same time, Perseus generates the time-lines and maps discussed earlier. Finally, the displaymodule configures the information the reader actuallysees, adding links, from proper names to maps orencyclopedias, choosing transliteration schemes, andadding cross-references from other works (see Figure4). The overall system gracefully manages many differ-ent types of XML document and allows collection edi-tors to configure the appearance of documents fordifferent audiences.

Language Tools (Not Just English)The most basic tools for learning a new language are adictionary and a grammar. Perseus includes scholarlydictionaries of Latin and Greek, grammatical referenceworks, and a morphological analysis tool that deter-mines the meaning of any form in these highlyinflected languages. Every Greek or Latin word ishyperlinked to the Perseus "word study tool,'' provid-ing a short dictionary definition, an explanation of thegrammatical form, and frequency statistics.We have enhanced the online dictionaries and lex-ica using standard techniques from corpus linguistics.The texts in Greek or Latin are scanned for word pairsthat co-occur regularly [9]. When a reader looks up aword in the lexicon, a table showing the five mostcommon collocates of that word appears at the head ofeach dictionary entry. This table includes links to thedictionary entries for each collocate as well as links tomore extensive lists showing the mutual informationscore for every Greek or Latin word pair appearing fiveor more times in the digital library (see Figure 5).

Figure 5. The dictionary entry is augmented with frequency information for the headword, wordswith similar definitions, and words commonly used with the given word.

Perseus has also calculated mutual informationscores for several subcorpora of texts representing dif-ferent styles and genres, including rhetoric, prose,tragedy, and poetry. If a user looks up a word whilereading a text in one of these subcorpora, the tableappearing in the dictionary entry shows the five mostcommon collocates for each applicable subcorpus, inaddition to the collocates for the complete collection ofPerseus Greek or Latin texts. Integration of these scoresinto the electronic lexicon allows readers to exploretexts in a way not possible outside the digital library;they quickly obtain a broad sense of the "company thewords keep,'' along with a rough guide to possibleidioms and common phrases.

General PrinciplesPerseus developers have been able to contribute to ourcollaborators' projects precisely to the extent that ourexperiences with Greco-Roman Perseus can be appliedto other domains. Our experience with the denselyinterlinked network of classical texts, encyclopedias,and commentaries helped us recognize what could bedone with editions and commentaries on Shakespeare.Our work on the Greek and Latin languages allowedour colleagues in the history of science, working withoriginal Arabic, Greek, Italian, and Latin texts, to seehow a digital library of source texts could augment theirresearch. Finally, the Bolles London collection capital-ized on our experience with automatic link generationand with the integration of disparate resources [2]. Thenineteenth-century materials in the London collectionare, however, filled with specific dates and locations inspace, while the Greco-Roman materials have muchcoarser geographic data and almost no dates. Modern materials thus raise problems of too muchdata, while the ancient materials force us to confrontthe problem of data sparsity. Different domains thuspose complementary problems.Different approaches to digital library design alsopose complementary problems. Many established digifor moderate amounts of programming and post-pro-cessing to extract core information. Given access toquality knowledge resources, it is possible to generateautomatic links between various parts of a digitallibrary and to develop new ways of visualizing its aggre-gate contents. The simple links leading from English texts inPerseus to other resources are surprisingly popular.Automatically extracted dates and toponyms, asdescribed earlier, generate maps and timelines to visual-ize the content of documents and collections [4, 6].Likewise, well-known techniques for document analysishave allowed us to begin linking documents with oneanother [1, 12]. Extracting similar information fromnon-textual objects, such as video, sound files, and stillimages, is a major, promising area for development.Develop language tools. Language--especially theones not widely spoken and studied today--is the mostdifficult and probably most important part of anycomprehensive cultural digital library. Processing a lex-icon and developing a morphological analyzer for aninflected language are expensive, messy, labor-intensivetasks, but the results add value to everything else thatsubsequently finds its way into a digital library. Whenwe began work on Roman Perseus in 1992, we there-fore chose to invest our entire data-entry budget in alexicon. In addition, although heavily inflected lan-guages like ancient Greek and Latin do not readily lendthemselves to some of the linguistic strategies that workwell for English, we have been able to adapt work orig-inally done on English to create tools like a searchengine that can recognize Latin fecerunt, "they did,'' asa form of facio, "do,'' or a spell checker for Greek.

# Conclusion

Creating and managing any digital library is laboriousand difficult. A mature one draws on many technolo-gies, and the ideal specialist in digital libraries wouldhave expertise in a daunting range of subjects. More-over, many of the fundamental decisions about thedesign and development of core digital resourcesrequire competence in both technology and content,as well as an instinct for how the discipline mightevolve over time, adapting its tactical goals (if not itsstrategic purpose) in light of possibilities provided byemerging technology. Ideally, designers of scholarly digital libraries shouldunderstand the unspoken and often unarticulated goalsof their discipline--an understanding that focusgroups and external observation can only partially pro-vide. These ideas may seem obvious to scientists and tolibrarians, but humanists are only beginning to recog-nize the need to study system and document design.Few graduate programs prepare humanists to bridge

the gap between emerging technology and the needs oftheir disciplines [3]. Digital library development in thehumanities includes both drudgery and deep thoughtthat differ from the drudgery and deep thought forwhich humanists have traditionally been trained.Nevertheless, the aggregation of many well-structured documents in intelligent digital library sys-tems raises the prospect of a golden age of the human-ities in which both researchers and the general publicare able to explore our common cultural heritage inextraordinary new ways.

# References
* 1. Boguraev, B. and Pustejovsky, Eds. Corpus Processing for Lexical Acquisition.MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1996.2. Crane, G. Designing documents to enhance the performance of digitallibraries: Time, space, people, and a digital library of London. D-Lib Mag.6, 7/8 (July/Aug. 2000); see www.dlib.org/dlib/july00/crane/07crane.html.3. Crane, G. and Rydberg-Cox, J. A. New technology and new roles: Theneed for "corpus editors." In Proceedings of the Fifth ACM Conference onDigital Libraries (San Antonio, TX, June 4-6). ACM Press, New York,2000, 252-253.4. Derthick, M. and Roth, S. Data exploration across temporal contexts. InProceedings of the 2000 International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces(New Orleans, Jan. 9-12). ACM Press, New York, 2000, 60-67.5. Eisenstein, E. The Printing Revolution in Early Modern Europe. CambridgeUniversity Press, Cambridge, UK, 1983.6. Kumar, V. and Furuta, R. Visualization of relationships. In Proceedings ofthe 10th ACM Conference on Hypertext and Hypermedia: Returning to OurDiverse Roots (Darmstadt, Germany, Feb. 21-25). ACM Press, New York,1999, 137-138.7. Marchionini, G. Evaluating digital libraries: A longitudinal and multifac-eted view. Library Trends in press.8. Mueller, M. Reading Homer electronically with the TLG, Perseus, and theChicago Homer.Ariadne 25 (2000); see www.ariadne.ac.uk/issue25/mueller.9. Rydberg-Cox, J. Word co-occurrence and lexical acquisition in ancientGreek texts. Lit. Ling. Comput. 15, 2 (2000), 121-129.10. Rydberg-Cox, J., Chavez, R., Mahoney, A., Smith, D., and Crane, G.Knowledge management in the Perseus Digital Library. Ariadne 25 (2000);see www.ariadne.ac.uk/issue25/rydberg-cox.11. Smith, D., Rydberg-Cox, J., and Crane, G. The Perseus project: A digitallibrary for the humanities. Lit. Ling. Comput. 15, 1 (2000), 15-25.12. Wilks, Y. and Catizone, R. Can we make information extraction moreadaptive? In Information Extraction: Towards Scalable, Adaptable Systems,Lecture Notes Artificial Intelligence 1714, Pazienza, M., Ed. Springer, Berlin,1999, 1-16.

# Gregory Crane

